
	The goal of the project was to explore the peak period of the Ellis Island immigration, which ranged from 1892 to 1924. Ultimately, it was decided to investigate the commonness and derivation of each group member’s surname based on the quantity and ethnicities of the immigrants who held the last names Mendoza, Noah and Waitman within that time frame. With much luck, a wealth of information was obtained related to this research. Initially, the most noticeable finding was the prevalence of immigrants with the last name Mendoza who entered the United States through Ellis Island during its height. Numbers reached 760, which made Mendoza the most common of the three surnames, succeeded by Noah (88) and Waitman (12). Compared to Mendoza, the amount of immigrants who arrived with the last names Noah and Waitman is relatively low, totaling to a mere 100 combined or nearly one-eighth of the amount of Mendozas. Curious about whether or not this phenomenon remains true today, recent world census records were explored and provided immediate evidence that it does.

	 Using the “New York Passenger Arrival Lists (Ellis Island), 1892-1924” database accessed through familysearch.org, a variety of knowledge was acquired, such as the sex, age, nationality, departure and arrival ports, ship name and entry date of each passenger. Some of the immigrants in the database also have their marital and citizen statuses and last known place of residence recorded. The decision to exclude these materials and narrow the focus to the previous sequence was based on the fact that this information is either not provided or ambiguous for the many of immigrants, as well as that it did not seem pertinent to the research goals. Additionally, since the number of Mendozas exceeded the amount of Noahs and Waitmans significantly, it was decided to condense the number to only 150 Mendozas, who were picked at random for analysis and comparison.
	Hypotheses and conclusions regarding the popularity and origins of the chosen surnames were formed and gathered, and verified with the dataset. To elaborate, the theory that Mendoza would be the most prominent, followed by Noah and then Waitman and guesses related to where these names stem from were confirmed. It was estimated that immigrants with the last names Mendoza, Noah and Waitman came from Spanish- and English-speaking nations. As anticipated, the majority of the Ellis Island arrivals selected carrying the name Mendoza were Cubans (53), Spaniards (17), Mexicans (15), Peruvians (10), Colombians (8), Argentinians (7), Puerto Ricans (7), Venezuelans (6), West Indians (3), Nicaraguans (2) , Panamanians (2), Filipinos (2), an Ecuadorian and a Honduran. The rest were identified as U.S. citizens (5), Portuguese (4), English (2), East Indian (2) and unknown nationality (3). Regarding Noah, immigrants from across the globe carried the name, most recognizing themselves as having duel nationalities or none at all. To explicate, many were British and English, but this includes those who identified as either strictly those or British/English and another ethnicity; for example, British African, British Syrian, British West Indian, English Canadian and English Newfoundlander. Other mixed groups are Austrian, Palestinian, and Russian Hebrews; one Jamaican African; Newfoundlander Assyrians and Syrians; and Turkish Syrians. The remaining single nationalities include American, Austrian, Dutch, German, Hungarian, Prussian, Roman, Romanian, Russian, Spanish, Syrian, Turkish and unknown. Finally, out of the Waitman group there is one American, one Briton, three Englishmen and an Irishman, and the other half is Austrian and Russian Hebrews.
  
	In the next step the prevalence of the three surnames within the modern world was compared. Using the forebears.io/surnames database, which contains the 2014 world census records, the order of prominence found by examining the Ellis Island immigrants was reinforced. According to the statistics, Mendoza at 1.7 million, Noah at 83,045 and Waitman at 1295, each ranked 279th, 6,558th and 247,631st, respectively, among the most common surnames in the world. Nonetheless, there were some distinctive findings. Prior to the Ellis Island switch, the project was originally to investigate colonialism in Africa. Not so coincidentally, examining the prevalence of specific surnames within the global contexts of Ellis Island immigrants and in today’s societies tied the project back to its first idea.
	The dispersal and commonness of surnames with Spanish and English heritage both a century ago and now can be explained by the fact that Spain and England were once supreme conquerers. With colonies in the Americas, Africa, Caribbean and Pacific Islands, Australia and parts of Asia, English and Spanish imperialists shaped and influenced those civilizations substantially. The evidence shows that aboriginal communities underwent name changes, in addition to what is generally known regarding religious and language impositions. By simply researching last names, this notion is corroborated by both the Ellis Island arrivals and contemporary demographics. To expound on a global scale, the majority of people with the surname Noah hail from African countries, including Cameroon, Nigeria, Uganda, Tanzania, Kenya, South Africa, Egypt, Papua New Guinea, and Ghana. Considering that the name does not derive from anywhere in that continent, the only logical deduction is the presence of English/European colonialism. Noah being a key biblical figure, when numerous African groups were subjugated and forced to adopt Abrahamic religions such as Christianity and Islam, his name probably became popular and widespread among nations which practice those faiths. The occurrence of Spanish colonialism is also demonstrated by the prominence of the Mendoza surname in today’s Mexico, Peru, Venezuela, Colombia, Nicaragua, Ecuador, Guatemala, Bolivia and Honduras whose native peoples were subdued by the Spanish and forced to take on Catholicism and the Spanish language.
